In this lecture, we will step away from our project to talk about classes.
If you already know PHP classes, you can skip this lecture for the rest of you.
Let's talk about classes in PHP.
Throughout this course we have written objects in JavaScript.
But what about PHP?
Does PHP support objects?
The answer is yes.
However, objects are written differently than objects.
In JavaScript, we must create something called a class.
A class can be thought of as a blueprint for a house before a house is built.
Contractors must be given a blueprint for the home.
The blueprint contains instructions and guidelines for the construction of a house.
Without a blueprint, there may be issues.
The same concept applies to PHP.
PHP does not know what an object should look like.
It needs help constructing an object.
A class is considered a blueprint for creating an object.
In the resource section of this lecture, I provide a link to a PHP playgrounds.
We are going to be using this playgrounds to create classes.
First, let's remove the initial PHP code from the example.
Next, let's define a class called House.
A class can be defined by typing the class keyword.
This class is followed by the name of the class.
After typing the name of the classes, we can add curly brackets.
The body of the class is written inside the brackets similar to objects in JavaScript.
Objects can have properties and methods.
Properties are variables for objects, whereas methods are functions for objects.
Let's define a variable called a color with an initial value of white.
Let's pretend the colour of our house is white.
In the future we may want to change the colour of the house.
Let's create a method for changing the colour below the variable defining function called set colour.
This function will accept an argument called new color.
Lastly, let's update the color by setting the this color property to the new color argument.
The this keyword exists in the PHP language.
It's a variable for accessing the properties from the same object.
PHP will search for a variable called color.
We do not need to include the dollar sign symbol for the color variable.
The dollar sign symbol must be added at the beginning of the line.
We can access properties and methods from an object by using an arrow.
In JavaScript, we could access properties with a dot.
It's different in PHP.
We must use an arrow.
After accessing the property, we can update the property.
In this case, we're updating the property with the new color arguments.
Our class is ready.
Keep in mind, we've created a blueprint.
The class is not a physical object that can be accessed.
We must create an instance of a class.
You may hear this word from time to time.
An instance is a copy of a class.
If a blueprint is the instructions for a building a house, an instance would be the physical house
itself.
Below the class, let's create a variable called my house.
The value for this variable will be the following code.
New house.
An instance must be stored in a variable.
Otherwise we would lose the instance.
The instance can be created by typing the new keyword.
This will instruct PHP to create an instance from a class.
This is followed by the name of the class with parentheses.
After creating an instance, let's try accessing the properties and methods from the class.
We can access a class's information with the same syntax.
We can write the name of the variable followed by an arrow.
Let's try echoing the color property.
This line will throw an error by default.
Properties are not accessible outside of the class.
Back in the class, let's add the public keyword to the color property.
In the resource section of this lecture, I provide a link to a list of access modifiers in PHP.
An access modifier is a key word for changing the accessibility of a property or method.
We can prevent outside code from accessing a property.
Access Modifiers Keep our classes secure.
There are various reasons for using access modifiers.
We won't be diving too deep into access modifiers for now.
Just know that a property is not publicly accessible without the public keyword.
By adding this keyword, our code should work before testing our code.
Let's update the color.
Call the set color function.
I'm going to change the color of my house to blue.
Lastly, I will echo the color of property again.
The set colour method does not need an access modifier by default.
Methods are publicly accessible.
Let's try running our code.
After a few moments, the colors should appear.
The house will originally be white by calling the set color method.
The color has changed to blue.
Overall, objects in PHP can be more complex to write than objects in JavaScript.
Don't worry, we aren't going to be heavily using objects in our PHP code.
It's going to become a relevant topic in the next lecture.
Once you're ready, let's hop back into our project.